.\" Man page for alph(1) — Alpheus Context Engine Framework CLI
.TH ALPH 1 "2026-03-12" "alph 0.1.33" "Alpheus Context Engine Framework"
.SH NAME
alph \- git-backed context management for LLMs
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B alph
.RI [ OPTIONS ]
.I COMMAND
.RI [ ARGS ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B alph
is the CLI for the Alpheus Context Engine Framework (AlpheusCEF).
It manages structured context nodes organized into pools within registries,
all backed by git for versioning, diffs, and collaboration.
.PP
Context flows through a funnel: registry \(-> pool \(-> node. Each level
carries a
.B context
field that orients humans and LLMs to the purpose of that entity.
.PP
Nodes are Markdown files with YAML frontmatter stored in
.B snapshots/
(point-in-time captures) or
.B live/
(pointers to external resources that resolve on demand).
.SH GLOBAL OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-v ", " \-\-verbose
Enable debug logging.
.TP
.B \-\-version
Show version and exit.
.TP
.BR \-r ", " \-\-reg ", " \-\-registry " " \fITEXT\fR
Override registry for one invocation: accepts a registry ID, human-readable name,
or a raw git remote URL (\fIgit@github.com:org/repo.git:/subpath\fR).
.TP
.BI \-\-branch " TEXT"
Override git branch for remote operations this invocation.
Useful with ad-hoc \fB\-\-registry\fR URLs that have no config entry.
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Show help and exit.
.SH COMMANDS
.SS "Node commands"
.TP
.B alph add
Create a context node in a pool.
Shorthand: \fBalph a\fR.
.RS
.TP
.BR \-c ", " \-\-context " " \fITEXT\fR
Context description for this node. Required.
.TP
.BR \-p ", " \-\-pool " " \fITEXT\fR
Pool path or name. Defaults to \fBdefault_pool\fR from config.
.TP
.BI \-\-creator " TEXT"
Creator email address. Defaults to \fBcreator\fR from config.
.TP
.BI \-\-type " TEXT"
\fBsnapshot\fR (or \fBsnap\fR) or \fBlive\fR. Default: snapshot.
.TP
.BI \-\-content " TEXT"
Optional Markdown body.
.TP
.BI \-\-status " TEXT"
\fBactive\fR (default), \fBarchived\fR, or \fBsuppressed\fR.
.RE
.TP
.B alph list
List nodes in a pool with frontmatter summary.
Shorthand: \fBalph l\fR.
.RS
.TP
.BR \-p ", " \-\-pool " " \fITEXT\fR
Pool path or name. Defaults to \fBdefault_pool\fR from config.
.TP
.BR \-s ", " \-\-status " " \fITEXT\fR
Filter by status. Omit for active-only.
Values: \fBarchived\fR, \fBsuppressed\fR, \fBall\fR, or comma-separated
(e.g. \fBarchived,suppressed\fR).
.TP
.BR \-o ", " \-\-output " " \fITEXT\fR
Output format: \fBconsole\fR (default), \fBjson\fR, \fByaml\fR, \fBcsv\fR.
.TP
.B \-\-pull
Pull latest changes before listing (RW clones only).
.RE
.TP
.B alph show \fINODE_ID\fR
Display full node content formatted for terminal.
Shorthand: \fBalph s\fR.
.RS
.TP
.BR \-p ", " \-\-pool " " \fITEXT\fR
Pool path or name.
.TP
.B \-\-pull
Pull latest changes before showing (RW clones only).
.RE
.TP
.B alph validate
Check all nodes in a pool against schema.
Shorthand: \fBalph v\fR.
.RS
.TP
.BR \-p ", " \-\-pool " " \fITEXT\fR
Pool path or name.
.TP
.B \-\-pull
Pull latest changes before validating (RW clones only).
.RE
.TP
.B alph defaults
Show the currently resolved defaults (registry, pool, creator).
.SS "Registry commands (alph registry | alph reg)"
.PP
When no subcommand is given, defaults to \fBregistry list\fR.
\fBalph reg\fR is an accepted shorthand for \fBalph registry\fR.
.TP
.B alph registry init
Create a registry and register it in the global config.
.RS
.TP
.BI \-\-pool\-home " TEXT"
Directory (local registry) or git remote URL
(\fIgit@github.com:org/repo.git:/subpath\fR for remote). Required.
.TP
.BI \-\-id " TEXT"
Machine identifier for the registry.
Must be unique and not a reserved name (\fBall\fR, \fBalph\fR). Required.
.TP
.BR \-c ", " \-\-context " " \fITEXT\fR
Human/LLM-readable description. Required.
.TP
.BI \-\-name " TEXT"
Optional human-readable name.
.TP
.BI \-\-mode " TEXT"
Access mode: \fBro\fR (read-only) or \fBrw\fR (read-write).
Auto-detected when omitted (ro for remote URLs, rw for local paths).
.TP
.BI \-\-clone\-path " TEXT"
Local directory for RW clone. Default: \fI~/.cache/alph/clones/<hash>/\fR.
.TP
.BI \-\-branch " TEXT"
Git branch for RO reads and RW clone checkout.
.TP
.BR \-\-auto\-push " | " \-\-no\-auto\-push
Push after each commit. Default: true for RW remote, false for local.
.TP
.BR \-\-auto\-pull " | " \-\-no\-auto\-pull
Pull before each read. Default: true for RW remote, false for local.
.RE
.TP
.B alph registry list
List all registries declared in the config file tree.
.TP
.B alph registry check \fR[\fIREGISTRY_ID\fR]
Verify a registry is reachable (path exists, remote responds).
Pass \fBall\fR to check every configured registry.
Defaults to \fBdefault_registry\fR when no argument is given.
.TP
.B alph registry clone \fR[\fIREGISTRY_ID\fR]
Clone a remote RW registry to a local directory.
A second invocation prints "already cloned" and exits cleanly.
Defaults to \fBdefault_registry\fR when no argument is given.
.RS
.TP
.BI \-\-clone\-path " PATH"
Local directory to clone into. Default: \fI~/.cache/alph/clones/<hash>/\fR.
.RE
.TP
.B alph registry pull \fR[\fIREGISTRY_ID\fR]
Pull latest changes for a cloned remote registry (\fBgit pull \-\-rebase\fR).
Handles diverged branches from concurrent writers.
Defaults to \fBdefault_registry\fR when no argument is given.
.TP
.B alph registry push \fR[\fIREGISTRY_ID\fR]
Push local commits in a cloned remote registry to the remote.
Use this to recover after a failed auto-push, or to push explicitly
when \fBauto_push\fR is disabled.
Defaults to \fBdefault_registry\fR when no argument is given.
.TP
.B alph registry status \fR[\fIREGISTRY_ID\fR]
Show registry status: mode, remote URL, clone state, unpushed commit count,
branch, auto_push, auto_pull, and path details.
Pass \fBall\fR to show status for every configured registry.
Defaults to \fBdefault_registry\fR when no argument is given.
.SS "Pool commands (alph pool)"
.PP
When no subcommand is given, defaults to \fBpool list\fR.
.TP
.B alph pool init
Create a pool inside a registry.
The pool name must not be a reserved name (\fBall\fR, \fBalph\fR).
.RS
.TP
.BR \-r ", " \-\-reg ", " \-\-registry " " \fITEXT\fR
Registry ID or name. Defaults to \fBdefault_registry\fR.
.TP
.BI \-\-name " TEXT"
Pool name (machine identifier, used as the directory name). Required.
.TP
.BR \-c ", " \-\-context " " \fITEXT\fR
Human/LLM-readable description. Required.
.TP
.BI \-\-type " TEXT"
Pool type: \fBsubdir\fR (default) or \fBrepo\fR.
.RE
.TP
.B alph pool list
List pools in a registry (configured entries and pools discovered on disk).
.SS "Config commands (alph config)"
.PP
When no subcommand is given, defaults to \fBconfig list\fR.
.TP
.B alph config list
List all config files in the discovery tree, showing which exist
and which registries each declares.
.TP
.B alph config show \fIPATH\fR
Display a specific config file with syntax highlighting.
.TP
.B alph config show\-all
Display the fully merged config with all default values filled in,
as alph sees it after applying the full cascade.
.TP
.B alph config check
Check all config files for unknown or legacy keys, and validate that
\fBdefault_registry\fR references a declared registry.
Reports typos such as \fBclone_dir\fR instead of \fBclone_path\fR.
.SH CONFIGURATION
.B alph
loads configuration from a cascade of YAML files. Priority (highest wins):
CLI flags > cwd-nearest config > ... > global config > built-in defaults.
.PP
Config files are discovered by walking up from the current directory.
The global config is always the base layer; local \fBconfig.yaml\fR files
add to or override individual values (registries accumulate across all layers).
.TP
.I ~/.config/alph/config.yaml
Global config (base layer). Created automatically by \fBalph registry init\fR.
Override the directory with \fBALPH_CONFIG_DIR\fR.
.TP
.I config.yaml
Local config files found by walking up from the current directory.
The most-specific (nearest to cwd) file wins for scalar values.
.PP
.B Example config.yaml:
.RS
.nf
creator: alice@example.com
auto_commit: false
default_registry: personal
default_pool: projects
completion_remote: false
completion_cache_ttl: 60

registries:
  personal:
    pool_home: ~/context
    context: "Local personal context"
    mode: rw
  shared:
    pool_home: git@github.com:org/repo.git:/registry
    context: "Shared team context"
    mode: ro
    branch: main
    completion_remote: true
  work-rw:
    pool_home: git@github.com:org/work.git:/ctx
    context: "Work registry (RW clone)"
    mode: rw
    clone_path: ~/work-ctx-clone
    auto_push: true
    auto_pull: true
    ssh_command: "ssh -i ~/.ssh/id_work"
.fi
.RE
.PP
.SS "Top-level config keys"
.TP
.B creator
Default creator email for new nodes.
.TP
.B auto_commit
When true, automatically \fBgit commit\fR after each node is created.
Default: false.
.TP
.B default_registry
Registry ID used when no \fB\-\-registry\fR flag is given.
.TP
.B default_pool
Pool name used when no \fB\-\-pool\fR flag is given.
.TP
.B register_subdir_pools
When true, \fBpool init\fR writes the pool entry to the config file
in addition to the pool-local \fI.alph.yaml\fR dotfile.
Default: false — subdir pools are discovered from the filesystem.
.TP
.B defaults_reminder
When true, \fBalph add\fR prints a reminder showing the resolved registry
and pool before writing the node. Default: true.
.TP
.B completion_remote
Global flag that controls whether tab completion for \fB\-\-pool\fR queries
RO remote registries via the forge API.
.RS
.IP \(bu 2
\fBfalse\fR (default): only local registry dirs and RW remote clone dirs
are scanned during completion. No network calls.
.IP \(bu 2
\fBtrue\fR: RO remote registries are also queried via the GitHub GraphQL API.
Results are cached; see \fBcompletion_cache_ttl\fR.
.PP
This flag has no effect on local registries or RW remote registries that have
a local clone — those are always scanned from disk regardless of this setting.
Per-registry \fBcompletion_remote\fR overrides this global default.
.RE
.TP
.B completion_cache_ttl
Seconds to cache remote pool-name results for tab completion.
Default: 60.
Set to 0 to always fetch live.
Cache files: \fI~/.cache/alph/completion/<hash>.json\fR.
.TP
.B registries
Map of registry IDs to registry entry objects (see below).
.SS "Registry entry keys"
Each entry in the \fBregistries\fR map accepts:
.TP
.B pool_home
Required. Local path or git remote URL.
Remote URL format: \fIgit@github.com:org/repo.git:/subpath\fR
(the \fB:/\fR delimiter separates the git URL from the path within the repo).
For HTTPS URLs: \fIhttps://github.com/org/repo.git:/subpath\fR.
.TP
.B context
Human/LLM-readable description of the registry.
.TP
.B name
Optional human-readable name (may contain spaces).
.TP
.B mode
\fBro\fR (read-only) or \fBrw\fR (read-write).
Auto-detected when omitted: \fBro\fR for remote URLs, \fBrw\fR for local paths.
.TP
.B clone_path
Local directory where the RW clone is stored.
Default when omitted: \fI~/.cache/alph/clones/<sha256(url)[:12]>/\fR.
Applies to RW remote registries only.
.TP
.B branch
Git branch for RO API reads and for RW clone checkout.
Omit to use \fBHEAD\fR / the default branch.
.TP
.B auto_push
When true, push to the remote after each \fBalph add\fR commit.
Default: true for RW remote registries, false for local.
On failure, an error is printed with a \fBalph registry push <id>\fR recovery hint.
.TP
.B auto_pull
When true, pull from the remote before each read operation (\fBlist\fR, \fBshow\fR, \fBvalidate\fR).
Default: true for RW remote registries, false for local.
.TP
.B ssh_command
Override \fBGIT_SSH_COMMAND\fR for all git operations on this registry.
Example: \fIssh \-i ~/.ssh/id_work\fR.
Useful when the registry is hosted on a forge that requires a non-default SSH key.
.TP
.B completion_remote
Per-registry override for tab completion.
.RS
.IP \(bu 2
\fBtrue\fR: this registry's pools are fetched via the forge API during tab completion,
even if the global \fBcompletion_remote\fR is false.
.IP \(bu 2
\fBfalse\fR: this registry is always skipped in completion, even if the global flag is true.
.IP \(bu 2
Omit: inherit the global \fBcompletion_remote\fR setting.
.PP
This key is meaningful only for RO remote registries with no local clone.
RW registries with a clone are always scanned from disk.
.RE
.TP
.B pools
Map of pool names to pool metadata objects.
Each pool entry may contain \fBcontext\fR and \fBtype\fR (\fBsubdir\fR or \fBrepo\fR).
Most pools are discovered from the filesystem without being declared here.
.SH TAB COMPLETION
.B alph
supports shell tab completion for registry IDs and pool names.
.PP
Install completion once for your shell:
.RS
.nf
alph completions install zsh      # or bash, fish
exec zsh                           # reload shell to activate
.fi
.RE
.PP
To print the script without installing (e.g., to pipe elsewhere):
.RS
.nf
alph completions show zsh
.fi
.RE
.PP
What completes:
.TP
Registry ID arguments (\fBcheck\fR, \fBclone\fR, \fBpull\fR, \fBpush\fR, \fBstatus\fR)
Returns all configured registry IDs plus the meta-reference \fBall\fR.
Filtered by prefix as you type.
.TP
\fB\-\-pool\fR / \fB\-p\fR options (\fBadd\fR, \fBlist\fR, \fBshow\fR, \fBvalidate\fR)
Scans for pool names based on registry type:
.RS
.IP \(bu 2
\fBLocal registry\fR: scans \fBpool_home\fR on disk. Fast, no network.
.IP \(bu 2
\fBRW remote with clone\fR: scans the local clone dir. Fast, no network.
.IP \(bu 2
\fBRO remote\fR: skipped by default. Enable with \fBcompletion_remote: true\fR
(global or per-registry) to query the forge API and cache results.
.RE
.PP
Remote pool completion is intentionally off by default to avoid network calls
during tab completion. When enabled, results are cached for \fBcompletion_cache_ttl\fR
seconds (default 60) in \fI~/.cache/alph/completion/\fR.
Any network or auth error during remote completion is silently suppressed
so a failing API call never interrupts the shell.
.SH POOL STRUCTURE
Each pool directory contains:
.RS
.TP
.I snapshots/
Point-in-time context nodes (Markdown with YAML frontmatter).
.TP
.I live/
Live nodes that point to external resources.
.TP
.I .alph.yaml
Pool-local metadata: context, creator, and creation date.
Created by \fBpool init\fR.
.RE
.SH NODE SCHEMA
Node frontmatter fields:
.RS
.TP
.B schema_version
Schema version (currently 1).
.TP
.B id
Deterministic identifier: sha256(source + context)[:12].
Identical inputs produce the same ID, enabling idempotent re-adds.
.TP
.B timestamp
ISO 8601 creation timestamp.
.TP
.B source
Origin of the context (e.g. URL, conversation title, document name).
.TP
.B node_type
\fBsnapshot\fR or \fBlive\fR.
.TP
.B context
Human/LLM-readable description of this specific node.
.TP
.B creator
Email of the node creator.
.TP
.B status
\fBactive\fR (default), \fBarchived\fR, or \fBsuppressed\fR.
.TP
.B tags
Optional list of string tags.
.TP
.B related_to
Optional list of related node IDs.
Supports cross-pool references (\fIpool::node_id\fR)
and cross-registry references (\fIregistry::pool::node_id\fR).
.TP
.B meta
Optional metadata dictionary.
Live nodes use \fBmeta.provider\fR and \fBmeta.resolves_to\fR
(\fBsingle\fR or \fBcollection\fR).
.RE
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B ALPH_CONFIG_DIR
Override the global config directory (default: \fI~/.config/alph/\fR).
Used primarily in testing.
.TP
.B GITHUB_TOKEN\fR, \fBGH_TOKEN
GitHub personal access token for remote registry API reads (RO mode and tab completion).
Falls back to \fBgh auth token\fR when neither is set.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I ~/.config/alph/config.yaml
Global configuration file. Written by \fBalph registry init\fR.
.TP
.I ~/.cache/alph/clones/
Default parent directory for remote registry clones (one subdirectory per remote URL).
.TP
.I ~/.cache/alph/completion/
Cache directory for remote pool-name completion results.
Files are named \fI<sha256(pool_home)[:16]>.json\fR and contain
the pool list and fetch timestamp.
Expired automatically based on \fBcompletion_cache_ttl\fR; safe to delete.
.SH EXAMPLES
Create a local registry and pool:
.PP
.RS
.nf
alph registry init \-\-pool\-home ~/context \-\-id personal \-c "Personal context"
alph pool init \-\-name projects \-c "Active projects"
.fi
.RE
.PP
Add a snapshot node and list it:
.PP
.RS
.nf
alph add \-c "Decided to use PostgreSQL for the new service"
alph list
alph show a1b2c3d4e5f6
.fi
.RE
.PP
Set up a read-only remote registry and browse it:
.PP
.RS
.nf
alph registry init \-\-pool\-home git@github.com:org/repo.git:/registry \\
    \-\-id shared \-c "Shared team context" \-\-mode ro \-\-branch main
alph list \-\-registry shared \-\-pool standards
.fi
.RE
.PP
Set up a read-write remote registry with a local clone:
.PP
.RS
.nf
alph registry init \-\-pool\-home git@github.com:org/work.git:/ctx \\
    \-\-id work \-c "Work context" \-\-mode rw
alph registry clone work
alph add \-\-registry work \-c "Architecture decision: service mesh"
.fi
.RE
.PP
Recover from a failed auto-push:
.PP
.RS
.nf
alph registry status work     # shows unpushed: N
alph registry push work
.fi
.RE
.PP
Enable tab completion for pool names on a RO remote:
.PP
.RS
.nf
# In ~/.config/alph/config.yaml, add under the registry entry:
#   completion_remote: true
#   completion_cache_ttl: 120   # optional, default 60
alph list \-\-pool <TAB>        # now returns pools from the remote
.fi
.RE
.PP
Check config for typos and view merged result:
.PP
.RS
.nf
alph config check
alph config show\-all
.fi
.RE
.SH MCP SERVER
.B alph\-mcp
exposes the same core functions as MCP tools for LLM integration.
It is installed alongside \fBalph\fR and is configured as an MCP server
in Claude Code, Cursor, or other MCP-compatible clients.
.PP
Register with Claude Code:
.RS
.nf
claude mcp add \-\-scope user alph \-\- alph\-mcp
.fi
.RE
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR git (1)
.PP
Project: https://github.com/AlpheusCEF/alph-cli
.SH AUTHORS
Chase Pettet
